<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE book PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DocBook XML V4.4//EN"
  "/usr/share/xml/docbook/schema/dtd/4.4/docbookx.dtd">
   
<book lang="en">
    
<bookinfo>
<title>DebGraph Manual</title>
<authorgroup>
<author>
<firstname>Adam</firstname>
<othername>C</othername>
<surname>Jensen</surname>
</author>
</authorgroup>
<date>7/17/2008</date>
<releaseinfo>1.0.0</releaseinfo>
</bookinfo>

 
<chapter id="introduction">
<title>Introduction</title>
	  
<para>
DebGraph is a tool that provides a simple, intuitive interface to the
Debian package dependency graph.  The package graph contains information
about packages (name, version, description, etc), their dependencies,
and other useful details.  By providing an easy way to interact with this
graph, DebGraph enables useful analyses that can identify interesting
or problematic package constellations.  As an example, it is helpful
for the Debian QA team to track cyclic dependencies (that is, packages
that [in]directly depend on themselves).  Such dependency cycles can be
symptoms of package problems, and therefore it is important that there
is tool support for locating and tracking them.
</para>

<para>
As the number of packages in Debian has grown, the complexity of the
package dependency graph has become difficult to manage.  New scripts
and programs that interact with package information must address that
complexity.  This involves writing code that can represent the graph
in memory and manipulate it, and such work is typically delicate and
error-prone.  It would be helpful to separate this functionality into
a standalone program (and perhaps an accompanying library) that could
provide generic graph infrastructure to anyone who needs to query or
manipulate the Debian package dependency graph.
</para>

<para>
DebGraph aims to provide this generic infrastructure through a set of
graph operators (e.g., union, intersection, find cycles, and so on)
that can be composed in complex ways to facilitate powerful analysis of
the graph.  In addition, integration with Lua enables graph queries from
a flexible, dynamically typed language, thus removing the constraint of
using C++ code to perform queries.
</para>

<para>
This work relieves developers of the burden of duplicating graph-specific
code when developing new tools (or extending existing ones) that
need access to the package dependency graph.  By providing a generic
infrastructure to support such tools, DebGraph enables tool developers
(and others in the community) to focus on the issue at hand without
becoming swamped with low-level details.
</para>
</chapter>

<chapter id="getting">
<title>Getting DebGraph</title>
<para>
The latest developmental code for DebGraph is kept in a Subversion
repository and can be fetched with the following command:
</para>

<para>
<computeroutput>
svn co https://debian.semistable.com/svn/debgraph
</computeroutput>
</para>

<para>
To compile the newly fetched source, a simple <emphasis>make</emphasis> 
should do the trick.
</para>
</chapter>

<chapter id="using">
<title>Using DebGraph</title>
<sect1 id="types">
<title>Object Types</title>
<para>
In this section, we provide an overview of the types of objects that are
encountered during a <emphasis>debgraph</emphasis> session.
</para>

<sect2 id="types_node">
<title>Node</title>
<para>
<emphasis>Node</emphasis> objects are the bread and butter of
<emphasis>debgraph</emphasis>.  While they typically represent packages,
<emphasis>Node</emphasis>s are also used to represent package names,
logical disjunctions (package X "OR" package Y), as well as abstractions
such as components or releases that gather packages into larger groups.
<emphasis>Node</emphasis>s have <emphasis>properties</emphasis> that 
provide detailed information about the package that each 
<emphasis>Node</emphasis> represents, including its name(s), version,
and maintainer.  Futher information is provided by linking
<emphasis>Node</emphasis> objects together with
<emphasis>edges</emphasis> to represent complex relationships.  These
edges can illustrate dependencies, conflicts, and other rich
inter-connections among vast sets of packages.
</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="types_graph">
<title>Graph</title>
<para>
While a <emphasis>Graph</emphasis> primarily plays the role of a container, 
it is nonetheless important to the usability and coherence of 
<emphasis>debgraph</emphasis>.  To borrow a definition from Graph
theory, a <emphasis>Graph</emphasis> is a set of
<emphasis>Nodes</emphasis> and a set of <emphasis>edges</emphasis>.  For
our purposes, it is enough to remember that a <emphasis>Graph</emphasis>
contains a set of <emphasis>Node</emphasis> objects that might be of
interest, particularly if the <emphasis>Graph</emphasis> is the result
of some operation that we have performed.
</para>
</sect2>

</sect1>

<sect1 id="startingup">
<title>Starting the command line interface</title>
<para>
When <emphasis>debgraph_cli</emphasis> is launched, it will display a Lua
prompt similar to the following:
</para>

<para>
<literallayout>Lua 5.1.3  Copyright (C) 1994-2008 Lua.org, PUC-Rio
debgraph version 0.1.1
></literallayout>
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="loadingpackages">
<title>Loading package indices</title>
<para>
At this point, <emphasis>debgraph_cli</emphasis> has loaded the
<emphasis>debgraph</emphasis> libraries and is ready to be used.  The
next task is to import some <ulink url="http://packages.debian.org">Package 
files</ulink> so that we have some data to analyze.
</para>

<para>
N.B.: If package information is not yet available, it can be fetched from a 
Debian mirror using the script <emphasis>S01updatecache</emphasis>
provided in the <emphasis>debgraph</emphasis> distribution.  Usage notes
are provided within the script file.
</para>

<para>
At this point, we assume that package information has been fetched and
is available in a directory named <emphasis>cache</emphasis> in the
current working directory.  We can now instruct the Lua interpreter to
parse the package information, as follows:

<literallayout>LoadPackages('cache')</literallayout>
</para>

<para>
The package files that we loaded above become part of a single graph
<emphasis>g</emphasis> that is discussed in the next section.
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="mothergraph">
<title>The mother graph</title>
<para>
All <emphasis>debgraph</emphasis> objects begin as components of a single
graph -- the mother graph, or <emphasis>g</emphasis>.  This variable
is available automatically after <emphasis>LoadPackages</emphasis>
has been called.  Naturally, the first operator that is executed must
do its work on <emphasis>g</emphasis> in order to obtain a useful result.
</para>

<para>
In the following example, we find dependency cycles in the nodes of 
<emphasis>g</emphasis> that are in the <quote>unstable</quote> distribution.

<example>
<title>Finding cycles in <emphasis>g</emphasis></title>
<programlisting> > components = FindCycles(g, "Release:unstable")
> print(#components)
58</programlisting>
</example>

Further examples that utilize this operator (and the others) are presented 
in the next section.  
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="exportedfunctions">
<title>Functions available in Lua</title>
<para>
The following functions are exported to Lua from the
core <emphasis>debgraph</emphasis> library.  The types of return and
parameter values should be understood as Lua (not C) types.
</para>

<funcsynopsis>
<funcprototype>
<funcdef>void <function>LoadPackages</function></funcdef>
	<paramdef>string <parameter>cache_directory</parameter></paramdef>
</funcprototype>
</funcsynopsis>
<para>
This function loads a series of Debian package index files, each of which
is typically named "Packages" and stored in a directory that denotes
its architecture and distribution (e.g., "stable/main/Packages").
These files contain detailed information about all of the software
packages available in Debian and enable <emphasis>debgraph</emphasis>
to perform powerful analysis on the relationships among the packages.
</para>

<funcsynopsis>
<funcprototype>
<funcdef>table <function>GetNodes</function></funcdef>
	<paramdef>Graph <parameter>g1</parameter></paramdef>
</funcprototype>
</funcsynopsis>
<para>
In order to facilitate loops over a set of nodes,
<emphasis>GetNodes</emphasis> extracts the Node objects from a given
Graph and returns them as a table (array).
</para>

<funcsynopsis>
<funcprototype>
<funcdef>table <function>GetNodeNames</function></funcdef>
	<paramdef>Graph <parameter>g1</parameter></paramdef>
</funcprototype>
</funcsynopsis>
<para>
Similar to the <emphasis>GetNodes</emphasis> function described above,
<emphasis>GetNodeNames</emphasis> extracts the Node objects from a given
Graph and builds a table (array) of only the textual names of the nodes
(e.g., "xorg-server").
</para>

<funcsynopsis>
<funcprototype>
<funcdef>string <function>GetProperty</function></funcdef>
	<paramdef>Node <parameter>n</parameter></paramdef>
	<paramdef>string <parameter>property_name</parameter></paramdef>
</funcprototype>
</funcsynopsis>
<para>
The <emphasis>GetProperty</emphasis> function retrieves a given property
from a Node object.  Popular examples of properties include "Package"
and "Version".
</para>

</sect1>

</chapter>

<chapter id="graphoperators">
<title>Graph Operators</title>
<sect1 id="overview">
<title>Overview</title>
<para>
In this chapter, we describe the purpose and operation of each graph
operator.  Each operator performs analysis on a graph, assembles a new
graph (or set of graphs) based on that analysis, and returns the result
for further analysis.
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="difference">
<title>Difference Operator</title>
<para>
<funcsynopsis>
<funcprototype>
<funcdef>Graph <function>Difference</function></funcdef>
	<paramdef>Graph <parameter>graph1</parameter></paramdef>
	<paramdef>Graph <parameter>graph2</parameter></paramdef>
</funcprototype>
</funcsynopsis>

The <emphasis>Difference</emphasis> operator performs a simple set
subtraction.  If <emphasis>G1</emphasis> and <emphasis>G2</emphasis>
are graphs, then <emphasis>Difference(G1, G2)</emphasis> returns a new
graph containing all nodes (packages) that are in <emphasis>S1</emphasis>
but NOT in <emphasis>S2</emphasis>, as one would expect.
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="filter">
<title>Filter Operator</title>
<para>
<funcsynopsis>
<funcprototype>
<funcdef>Graph <function>Filter</function></funcdef>
	<paramdef>Graph <parameter>g</parameter></paramdef>
	<paramdef>string <parameter>property_name</parameter></paramdef>
	<paramdef>string <parameter>property_value</parameter></paramdef>
</funcprototype>
</funcsynopsis>

The <emphasis>Filter</emphasis> operator enables searching for nodes
(packages) by their properties (name, version, maintainer, etc).
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="findcycles">
<title>FindCycles Operator</title>
<para>
<funcsynopsis>
<funcprototype>
<funcdef>Graph <function>FindCycles</function></funcdef>
	<paramdef>Graph <parameter>g</parameter></paramdef>
</funcprototype>
</funcsynopsis>

The <emphasis>FindCycles</emphasis> operator locates all strongly
connected components (for our purposes we can refer to these simply as
<emphasis>cycles</emphasis>) in a graph <emphasis>g</emphasis>.  A
starting node for the search is chosen arbitrarily.

<funcsynopsis>
<funcprototype>
<funcdef>Graph <function>FindCycles</function></funcdef>
	<paramdef>Graph <parameter>g</parameter></paramdef>
	<paramdef>Node <parameter>starting_node</parameter></paramdef>
</funcprototype>
</funcsynopsis>

In this form, <emphasis>FindCycles</emphasis> returns a set of
components (properly, a set of sets of nodes), beginning its search
at <emphasis>starting_node</emphasis>.  It is often helpful to use a
release node (e.g., "Release:testing") as a starting point.

<funcsynopsis>
<funcprototype>
<funcdef>Graph <function>FindCycles</function></funcdef>
	<paramdef>Graph <parameter>g</parameter></paramdef>
	<paramdef>String[] <parameter>allowed_edge_types</parameter></paramdef>
	<paramdef>Node <parameter>starting_node</parameter></paramdef>
</funcprototype>
</funcsynopsis>

In this form, <emphasis>FindCycles</emphasis> takes a set of edge types
(strings) as its second parameter, enabling the user to specify the
types of edges ("DEPENDS", "HAS_VERSION", etc) that should be followed
while looking for cycles.
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="finddeps">
<title>FindDeps Operator</title>
<para>
<funcsynopsis>
<funcprototype>
<funcdef>Graph <function>FindDeps</function></funcdef>
	<paramdef>Graph <parameter>g</parameter></paramdef>
	<paramdef>Node <parameter>n</parameter></paramdef>
</funcprototype>
</funcsynopsis>

The <emphasis>FindDeps</emphasis> operator locates the nodes (packages)
that <emphasis>n</emphasis> depends on.  In other words, it returns a
graph with every package <emphasis>p</emphasis> for which there is a
dependency edge <emphasis>(n,p)</emphasis> in <emphasis>g</emphasis>.
This continues recursively until a package with zero dependencies is
reached, thus providing an exhaustive list of packages needed in order
to install and use <emphasis>n</emphasis>.
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="findreversedeps">
<title>FindRevDeps Operator</title>
<para>
<funcsynopsis>
<funcprototype>
<funcdef>Graph <function>FindRevDeps</function></funcdef>
	<paramdef>Graph <parameter>g</parameter></paramdef>
	<paramdef>Node <parameter>n</parameter></paramdef>
</funcprototype>
</funcsynopsis>

The <emphasis>FindRevDeps</emphasis> operator locates the nodes (packages)
that depend on <emphasis>n</emphasis>.  In other words, it returns a
graph with every package <emphasis>p</emphasis> for which there is a
dependency edge <emphasis>(p,n)</emphasis> in <emphasis>g</emphasis>.
This continues recursively until a package with zero reverse dependencies
is reached, thus providing an exhaustive list of packages whose use and
installation depends on <emphasis>n</emphasis>.
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="intersection">
<title>Intersection Operator</title>
<para>
<funcsynopsis>
<funcprototype>
<funcdef>Graph <function>Intersection</function></funcdef>
	<paramdef>Graph <parameter>graph1</parameter></paramdef>
	<paramdef>Graph <parameter>graph2</parameter></paramdef>
</funcprototype>
</funcsynopsis>

The <emphasis>Intersection</emphasis> operator performs a set intersect
operation.  If <emphasis>G1</emphasis> and <emphasis>G2</emphasis> are
graphs, then <emphasis>Intersection(G1, G2)</emphasis> returns a new
graph containing the nodes that are found in <emphasis>G1</emphasis> AND
<emphasis>G2</emphasis>.
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="union">
<title>Union Operator</title>
<para>
<funcsynopsis>
<funcprototype>
<funcdef>Graph <function>Union</function></funcdef>
	<paramdef>Graph <parameter>graph1</parameter></paramdef>
	<paramdef>Graph <parameter>graph2</parameter></paramdef>
</funcprototype>
</funcsynopsis>

The <emphasis>Union</emphasis> operator performs a set union
operation.  If <emphasis>G1</emphasis> and <emphasis>G2</emphasis> are
graphs, then <emphasis>Union(G1, G2)</emphasis> returns a new
graph containing the nodes that are found in <emphasis>G1</emphasis> OR
<emphasis>G2</emphasis> (inclusive).
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="xor">
<title>XOR Operator</title>
<para>
<funcsynopsis>
<funcprototype>
<funcdef>Graph <function>XOR</function></funcdef>
	<paramdef>Graph <parameter>graph1</parameter></paramdef>
	<paramdef>Graph <parameter>graph2</parameter></paramdef>
</funcprototype>
</funcsynopsis>

The <emphasis>XOR</emphasis> operator performs a set union operation.
If <emphasis>G1</emphasis> and <emphasis>G2</emphasis> are graphs,
then <emphasis>XOR(G1, G2)</emphasis> returns a new graph containing
the nodes that are found in either <emphasis>G1</emphasis> OR
<emphasis>G2</emphasis> but NOT both.
</para>
</sect1>
</chapter>

<chapter id="examples">
<title>Examples</title>
<para>
</para>
</chapter>

<chapter id="luacintegration">
<title>Lua/C Integration Details</title>
<sect1 id="luacintegration_overview">
<title>Overview</title>
<para>
This section provides some insight into the machinery that moves data
between <emphasis>debgraph</emphasis>'s core C library and the Lua
interpreter that is frequently used to drive it.  Among other things, we
describe the organization of the Lua data structures that represent
native <emphasis>debgraph</emphasis> objects.

The complex Lua data type used most often is called a
<emphasis>table</emphasis>.  Fundamentally, this is an array that can
take on methods and properties of its own, much like a
Javascript object.  Every native <emphasis>debgraph</emphasis> object
(Graph, Node, etc.) that is passed to Lua is expressed as a
<emphasis>table</emphasis>.  We discuss each of these objects and their
structures in turn. 
</para>

<sect2 id="luacintegration_node">
<title>Node</title>
<para>
As described <link linkend="types_node">above</link>, 
<emphasis>Node</emphasis> objects represent packages and pseudo-packages.  
Each <emphasis>Node</emphasis> is represented by a Lua table.  The internal
details of this table deal mostly with memory accounting, so it is safe
to treat a <emphasis>Node</emphasis> as an opaque object when
manipulating it from Lua.  For completeness, however, we will document
the table members here.
</para>

<para>
Each <emphasis>Node</emphasis> instance has at least two members:
<emphasis>__dgtype</emphasis> and <emphasis>__ptr</emphasis>.
<emphasis>__dgtype</emphasis> is a string that can take on values of
`graph' or `node', thus indicating the type of object that the table
represents.  <emphasis>__ptr</emphasis>, on the other hand, is an
integer (pointer) that stores the memory address of the 
<emphasis>Node</emphasis> object (created by the C library) being 
represented by the table.
</para>
</sect2>

<sect2 id="luacintegration_graph">
<title>Graph</title>
<para>
The <emphasis>Graph</emphasis> is the most popular return type of the
graph operators supported by <emphasis>debgraph</emphasis>.  It consists
of a set of <emphasis>Node</emphasis> instances.  In the C library, each
<emphasis>Graph</emphasis> is represented by an instance of the
<emphasis>Graph</emphasis> class.  In Lua, this structure is represented
by a table.  The table shares the same members as
<emphasis>Node</emphasis> (i.e., `__dgtype' and `__ptr'), and its
constituent <emphasis>Node</emphasis> instances are stored naturally as
elements of the table.
</para>
</sect2>
</sect1>

</chapter>
</book>
